README.md, before:

[![pipeline status](https://gitlab.cern.ch/atlas-caf/CAFExample/badges/master/pipeline.svg)](https://gitlab.cern.ch/atlas-caf/CAFExample/commits/master)

Example CAFCore Analysis
=========================

This repository is meant as an example for how to construct an analysis using the [CAFCore](https://gitlab.cern.ch/atlas-caf/CAFCore) framework. In order to begin a new analysis, simply fork this project and modify the scripts and configs which are available here.

Cloning the project
--------------------

```bash
setupATLAS
lsetup git # needed for 'git submodule update --remote'
mkdir AnalysisExample
cd AnalysisExample
git clone --recursive ssh://git@gitlab.cern.ch:7999/atlas-caf/CAFExample.git
cd CAFExample
git submodule update --remote
cd ..
```

Building the project
---------------------

```bash
mkdir build
cd build
asetup 21.2.4,AnalysisBase
cmake ../CAFExample
source ../CAFExample/CAFCore/cafsetup.sh
make -j4
```

Running an example analysis
----------------------------

```bash
cd ../CAFExample/share
./prepare.py nTuple/config/master/prepare-ZjetsFF-Example.cfg
./initialize.py nTuple/config/master/initialize-ZjetsFF-Example.cfg
./analyze.py nTuple/config/master/analyze-ZjetsFF-Example.cfg
./visualize.py nTuple/config/master/visualize-ZjetsFF-Example.cfg
```

Commit message:

Update README with more detail about the example analysis being run

README.md, after:

[![pipeline status](https://gitlab.cern.ch/atlas-caf/CAFExample/badges/master/pipeline.svg)](https://gitlab.cern.ch/atlas-caf/CAFExample/commits/master)

Example CAFCore Analysis
=========================

This repository is meant as an example for how to construct an analysis using the [CAFCore](https://gitlab.cern.ch/atlas-caf/CAFCore) framework. In order to begin a new analysis, simply fork this project and modify the scripts and configs which are available here.

Cloning the project
--------------------

```bash
setupATLAS
lsetup git # needed for 'git submodule update --remote'
mkdir AnalysisExample
cd AnalysisExample
git clone --recursive ssh://git@gitlab.cern.ch:7999/atlas-caf/CAFExample.git
cd CAFExample
git submodule update --remote
cd ..
```

Building the project
---------------------

```bash
mkdir build
cd build
asetup AnalysisBase,21.2.4
cmake ../CAFExample
source ../CAFExample/CAFCore/cafsetup.sh
make -j4
```

Running an example analysis on flat nTuples
-------------------------------------------

The following scripts will (very quickly) run over a selection of flat nTuples to reproduce the cutflow and some visualized results for a Zjets Fake Factor estimate. It is not meant to describe the bare minimum configuration needed for producing results (that's what the dummy example provided in the near future will be for).
Similarly, a full-blown analysis is likely to include a host of custom observables which are calculated on-the-fly during runtime and for many more events (all quantities in this case have been pre-computed).
Rather, it is simply meant to showcase how fast results can be obtained once the uninteresting events have been skimmed away and the necessary quantities are already available directly in the TTree.

```bash
cd ../CAFExample/share
./prepare.py nTuple/config/master/prepare-ZjetsFF-Example.cfg
./initialize.py nTuple/config/master/initialize-ZjetsFF-Example.cfg
./analyze.py nTuple/config/master/analyze-ZjetsFF-Example.cfg
./visualize.py nTuple/config/master/visualize-ZjetsFF-Example.cfg
```
